README.md, before:

# TabDiff: a Mixed-type Diffusion Model for Tabular Data Generation

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/MinkaiXu/TabDiff/blob/main/LICENSE">
    <img alt="MIT License" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg">
  </a>
  <a href="https://openreview.net/forum?id=swvURjrt8z">
    <img alt="Openreview" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/review-OpenReview-blue">
  </a>
  <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20626">
    <img alt="Paper URL" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/cs.LG-2410.20626-B31B1B.svg">
  </a>
</p>

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tabdiff_demo.gif" alt="Model Logo" width="800" style="margin-left:'auto' margin-right:'auto' display:'block'"/>
  <p><em>Figure 1: Visualing the generative process of TabDiff. A high-quality version of this video can be found at <a href="images/tabdiff_demo.mp4" download>tabdiff_demo.mp4</a></em></p>
</div>

This repository provides the official implementation of TabDiff: a Mixed-type Diffusion Model for Tabular Data Generation (ICLR 2025).

## Latest Update
- [2025.04]：The categorical-heavy dataset **[Diabetes](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/296/diabetes+130-us+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)** evaluated in the paper has now been released!
- [2025.02]：Our code is finally released! We have released part of the tested datasets. The rest will be released soon!

## Introduction

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tabdiff_flowchart.jpg" alt="Model Logo" width="800" style="margin-left:'auto' margin-right:'auto' display:'block'"/>
  <p><em>Figure 2: The high-level schema of TabDiff</a></em></p>
</div>
TabDiff is a unified diffusion framework designed to model all muti-modal distributions of tabular data in a single model. Its key innovations include:  

1) Framing the joint diffusion process in continuous time,
2) A feature-wised learnable diffusion process that offsets the heterogeneity across different feature distributions,
3) Classifier-free guidance conditional generation for missing column value imputation. 

The schema of TabDiff is presented in the figure above. For more details, please refer to [our paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20626).


## Environment Setup

Create the main environment with [tabdiff.yaml](tabdiff.yaml). This environment will be used for all tasks except for the evaluation of additional data fidelity metrics (i.e., $\alpha$-precision and $\beta$-recall scores)

```
conda env create -f tabdiff.yaml
```

Create another environment with [synthcity.yaml](synthcity.yaml) to evaluate additional data fidelity metrics

```
conda env create -f synthcity.yaml
```

## Datasets Preparation

### Using the datasets experimented in the paper

Download raw datasets:

```
python download_dataset.py
```

Process datasets:

```
python process_dataset.py
```

### Using your own dataset

First, create a directory for your dataset in [./data](./data):
```
cd data
mkdir <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>
```

Compile your raw tabular data in .csv format. **The first row should be the header** indicating the name of each column, and the remaining rows are records. After finishing these steps, place you data's csv file in the directory you just created and name it as <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>.csv. 

Then, create <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>.json in [./data/Info](./data/Info). Write this file with the metadata of your dataset, covering the following information:
```
{
    "name": "<NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>",
    "task_type": "[NAME_OF_TASK]", # binclass or regression
    "header": "infer",
    "column_names": null,
    "num_col_idx": [LIST],  # list of indices of numerical columns
    "cat_col_idx": [LIST],  # list of indices of categorical columns
    "target_col_idx": [list], # list of indices of the target columns (for MLE)
    "file_type": "csv",
    "data_path": "data/<NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>/<NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>.csv"
    "test_path": null,
}
```

Finally, run the following command to process your dataset:
```
python process_dataset.py --dataname <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>
```

## Training TabDiff

To train an unconditional TabDiff model across the entire table, run

```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode train
```

Current Options of ```<NAME_OF_DATASET>``` are: adult, default, shoppers, magic, beijing, news

Wanb logging is enabled by default. To disable it and log locally, add the ```--no_wandb``` flag.

To disable the learnable noise schedules, add the ```--non_learnable_schedule```. Please note that in order for the code to test/sample from such model properly, you need to add this flag for all commands below.

To specify your own experiment name, which will be used for logging and saving files, add ```--exp_name <your experiment name>```. This flag overwrites the default experiment name (learnable_schedule/non_learnable_schedule), so, similar to ```--non_learnable_schedule```, once added to training, you need to add it to all following commands as well.

## Sampling and Evaluating TabDiff (Density, MLE, C2ST)

To sample synthetic tables from trained TabDiff models and evaluate them, run
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode test --report --no_wandb
```

This will sample 20 synthetic tables randomly. Meanwhile, it will evaluate the density, mle, and c2st scores for each sample and report their average and standard deviation. The results will be printed out in the terminal, and the samples and detailed evaluation results will be placed in ./eval/report_runs/<EXP_NAME>/<NAME_OF_DATASET>/.

## Evaluating on Additional Fidelity Metrics ($\alpha$-precision and $\beta$-recall scores)
To evaluate TabDiff on the additional fidelity metrics ($\alpha$-precision and $\beta$-recall scores), you need to first make sure that you have already generated some samples by the previous commands. Then, you need to switch to the `synthcity` environment (as the synthcity packet used to compute those metrics conflicts with the main environment), by running
```
conda activate synthcity
```
Then, evaluate the metrics by running
```
python eval/eval_quality.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>
```

Similarly, the results will be printed out in the terminal and added to ./eval/report_runs/<EXP_NAME>/<NAME_OF_DATASET>/

## Evaluating Data Privacy (DCR score)
To evalute the privacy metric DCR score, you first need to retrain all the models, as the metric requires an equal split between the training and testing data (our initial splits employ a 90/10 ratio). To retrain with an equal split, run the training command but append `_dcr` to ```<NAME_OF_DATASET>```
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>_dcr --mode train
```

Then, test the models on DCR with the same `_dcr` suffix
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>_dcr --mode test --report --no_wandb
```



## Missing Value Imputation with Classifier-free Guidance (CFG)
Our current experiments only include imputing the target column. However, our implementation, located at ```sample_impute()``` in [unified_ctime_diffusion.py](./tabdiff/models/unified_ctime_diffusion.py), should support imputing multiple columns with different data types.

### Training Guidance Model
In order to enable classifier-free guidance (CFG), you need to first train an unconditional guidance model on the target column by running the training command with the `--y_only` flag
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode train --y_only
```

### Sampling Imputed Tables
With the trained guidance model, you can then impute the missing target column by running the testing command with the `--impute` flag
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode test --impute --no_wandb
```
This will, by default, randomly produce 50 imputed tables and save them to ./impute/<NAME_OF_DATASET>/<EXP_NAME>.

### Evaluating Imputation
You can then evaluate the imputation quality by running
```
python eval_impute.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>
```

## License

This work is licensed undeer the MIT License.

## Acknowledgement
This repo is built upon the previous work TabSyn's [[codebase]](https://github.com/amazon-science/tabsyn). Many thanks to Hengrui!

## Citation
Please consider citing our work if you find it helpful in your research!
```
@inproceedings{
shi2025tabdiff,
title={TabDiff: a Mixed-type Diffusion Model for Tabular Data Generation},
author={Juntong Shi and Minkai Xu and Harper Hua and Hengrui Zhang and Stefano Ermon and Jure Leskovec},
booktitle={The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations},
year={2025},
url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=swvURjrt8z}
}
```
## Contact
If you encounter any problem, please file an issue on this GitHub repo.

If you have any question regarding the paper, please contact Minkai at [minkai@stanford.edu](minkai@stanford.edu) or Juntong at [shisteve@usc.edu](shisteve@usc.edu).

Commit message:

Add important notes when creating the Info file for your own datasets

README.md, after:

# TabDiff: a Mixed-type Diffusion Model for Tabular Data Generation

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/MinkaiXu/TabDiff/blob/main/LICENSE">
    <img alt="MIT License" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg">
  </a>
  <a href="https://openreview.net/forum?id=swvURjrt8z">
    <img alt="Openreview" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/review-OpenReview-blue">
  </a>
  <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20626">
    <img alt="Paper URL" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/cs.LG-2410.20626-B31B1B.svg">
  </a>
</p>

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tabdiff_demo.gif" alt="Model Logo" width="800" style="margin-left:'auto' margin-right:'auto' display:'block'"/>
  <p><em>Figure 1: Visualing the generative process of TabDiff. A high-quality version of this video can be found at <a href="images/tabdiff_demo.mp4" download>tabdiff_demo.mp4</a></em></p>
</div>

This repository provides the official implementation of TabDiff: a Mixed-type Diffusion Model for Tabular Data Generation (ICLR 2025).

## Latest Update
- [2025.04]：The categorical-heavy dataset **[Diabetes](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/296/diabetes+130-us+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)** evaluated in the paper has now been released!
- [2025.02]：Our code is finally released! We have released part of the tested datasets. The rest will be released soon!

## Introduction

<div align="center">
  <img src="images/tabdiff_flowchart.jpg" alt="Model Logo" width="800" style="margin-left:'auto' margin-right:'auto' display:'block'"/>
  <p><em>Figure 2: The high-level schema of TabDiff</a></em></p>
</div>
TabDiff is a unified diffusion framework designed to model all muti-modal distributions of tabular data in a single model. Its key innovations include:  

1) Framing the joint diffusion process in continuous time,
2) A feature-wised learnable diffusion process that offsets the heterogeneity across different feature distributions,
3) Classifier-free guidance conditional generation for missing column value imputation. 

The schema of TabDiff is presented in the figure above. For more details, please refer to [our paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20626).


## Environment Setup

Create the main environment with [tabdiff.yaml](tabdiff.yaml). This environment will be used for all tasks except for the evaluation of additional data fidelity metrics (i.e., $\alpha$-precision and $\beta$-recall scores)

```
conda env create -f tabdiff.yaml
```

Create another environment with [synthcity.yaml](synthcity.yaml) to evaluate additional data fidelity metrics

```
conda env create -f synthcity.yaml
```

## Datasets Preparation

### Using the datasets experimented in the paper

Download raw datasets:

```
python download_dataset.py
```

Process datasets:

```
python process_dataset.py
```

### Using your own dataset

First, create a directory for your dataset in [./data](./data):
```
cd data
mkdir <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>
```

Compile your raw tabular data in .csv format. **The first row should be the header** indicating the name of each column, and the remaining rows are records. After finishing these steps, place you data's csv file in the directory you just created and name it as <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>.csv. 

Then, create <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>.json in [./data/Info](./data/Info). Write this file with the metadata of your dataset, covering the following information:
```
{
    "name": "<NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>",
    "task_type": "[NAME_OF_TASK]", # binclass or regression
    "header": "infer",
    "column_names": null,
    "num_col_idx": [LIST],  # list of indices of numerical columns
    "cat_col_idx": [LIST],  # list of indices of categorical columns
    "target_col_idx": [list], # list of indices of the target columns (for MLE)
    "file_type": "csv",
    "data_path": "data/<NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>/<NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>.csv"
    "test_path": null,
}
```

### Important Notes When Creating the Info File
- The MLE evaluation and the imputation task (see later sections for details) assume that one column of your data is the regression or classification target. To enable these tasks, you will need to specify `target_col_idx`. If you don't need to evalute MLE, you can comment out the following line: https://github.com/MinkaiXu/TabDiff/blob/0c4fc3bbfa19046d36c5dce64628df52d5c73d15/tabdiff/main.py#L152
- The fields `target_col_idx`, `num_col_idx` and `cat_col_idx` must be multually exclusive—no column should appear in more than one of these lists. 
- Set the task_type to "regression" if the target column is numerical, or "binclass" if it is categorical.

Finally, run the following command to process your dataset:
```
python process_dataset.py --dataname <NAME_OF_YOUR_DATASET>
```

## Training TabDiff

To train an unconditional TabDiff model across the entire table, run

```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode train
```

Current Options of ```<NAME_OF_DATASET>``` are: adult, default, shoppers, magic, beijing, news

Wanb logging is enabled by default. To disable it and log locally, add the ```--no_wandb``` flag.

To disable the learnable noise schedules, add the ```--non_learnable_schedule```. Please note that in order for the code to test/sample from such model properly, you need to add this flag for all commands below.

To specify your own experiment name, which will be used for logging and saving files, add ```--exp_name <your experiment name>```. This flag overwrites the default experiment name (learnable_schedule/non_learnable_schedule), so, similar to ```--non_learnable_schedule```, once added to training, you need to add it to all following commands as well.

## Sampling and Evaluating TabDiff (Density, MLE, C2ST)

To sample synthetic tables from trained TabDiff models and evaluate them, run
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode test --report --no_wandb
```

This will sample 20 synthetic tables randomly. Meanwhile, it will evaluate the density, mle, and c2st scores for each sample and report their average and standard deviation. The results will be printed out in the terminal, and the samples and detailed evaluation results will be placed in ./eval/report_runs/<EXP_NAME>/<NAME_OF_DATASET>/.

## Evaluating on Additional Fidelity Metrics ($\alpha$-precision and $\beta$-recall scores)
To evaluate TabDiff on the additional fidelity metrics ($\alpha$-precision and $\beta$-recall scores), you need to first make sure that you have already generated some samples by the previous commands. Then, you need to switch to the `synthcity` environment (as the synthcity packet used to compute those metrics conflicts with the main environment), by running
```
conda activate synthcity
```
Then, evaluate the metrics by running
```
python eval/eval_quality.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>
```

Similarly, the results will be printed out in the terminal and added to ./eval/report_runs/<EXP_NAME>/<NAME_OF_DATASET>/

## Evaluating Data Privacy (DCR score)
To evalute the privacy metric DCR score, you first need to retrain all the models, as the metric requires an equal split between the training and testing data (our initial splits employ a 90/10 ratio). To retrain with an equal split, run the training command but append `_dcr` to ```<NAME_OF_DATASET>```
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>_dcr --mode train
```

Then, test the models on DCR with the same `_dcr` suffix
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>_dcr --mode test --report --no_wandb
```



## Missing Value Imputation with Classifier-free Guidance (CFG)
Our current experiments only include imputing the target column. However, our implementation, located at ```sample_impute()``` in [unified_ctime_diffusion.py](./tabdiff/models/unified_ctime_diffusion.py), should support imputing multiple columns with different data types.

### Training Guidance Model
In order to enable classifier-free guidance (CFG), you need to first train an unconditional guidance model on the target column by running the training command with the `--y_only` flag
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode train --y_only
```

### Sampling Imputed Tables
With the trained guidance model, you can then impute the missing target column by running the testing command with the `--impute` flag
```
python main.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET> --mode test --impute --no_wandb
```
This will, by default, randomly produce 50 imputed tables and save them to ./impute/<NAME_OF_DATASET>/<EXP_NAME>.

### Evaluating Imputation
You can then evaluate the imputation quality by running
```
python eval_impute.py --dataname <NAME_OF_DATASET>
```

## License

This work is licensed undeer the MIT License.

## Acknowledgement
This repo is built upon the previous work TabSyn's [[codebase]](https://github.com/amazon-science/tabsyn). Many thanks to Hengrui!

## Citation
Please consider citing our work if you find it helpful in your research!
```
@inproceedings{
shi2025tabdiff,
title={TabDiff: a Mixed-type Diffusion Model for Tabular Data Generation},
author={Juntong Shi and Minkai Xu and Harper Hua and Hengrui Zhang and Stefano Ermon and Jure Leskovec},
booktitle={The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations},
year={2025},
url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=swvURjrt8z}
}
```
## Contact
If you encounter any problem, please file an issue on this GitHub repo.

If you have any question regarding the paper, please contact Minkai at [minkai@stanford.edu](minkai@stanford.edu) or Juntong at [shisteve@usc.edu](shisteve@usc.edu).
